Every time AI gives you a bad answer,
Chat GPT, Claude, Gemini, it doesn't
matter which one, it comes down to one
of four reasons. After hundreds of
conversations with people struggling to
get results from AI, I started to see
the same pattern over and over. And once
you know what to look for, you can
figure out what went wrong in about 60
seconds. So today, I'm going to walk you
through a thing that I call the failure
stack. It's four layers and you check it
from the bottom to the top. We're
actually going to start with one that
almost everyone overlooks. So, with that
being said, let's get into it. Okay, so
here's the failure stack. We're going to
use these four layers to diagnose and
uncover common areas why AI fails and
different ways we can get around it
instead of just giving up on AI. The way
we're going to work through this stack
is from one to four. We'll start with
the input and the context, then we'll
work to the model and the wall. Now,
let's start with the uh the input. The
way that I define input in this context
for the failure stack are the size,
complexity, and type of files that
you're feeding into AI because
oftentimes if it's too complex, too big,
or a certain type of file, what will
happen is you give the file to AI and
you assume that the AI reads everything.
But what happens is it reads the green
spaces and ignores the red spaces. It
gives you an answer that looks valid,
but if you double check it, you realize
that it missed a lot of stuff. Now,
there's a few different ways that we can
mitigate this or fix it. The first one I
recommend doing is a spot check to just
check the quality of the AI's ability to
extract information from this file. So,
in this case, let's say that we're
dropping in a PDF. And the PDF is quite
complex. It has all types of screenshots
and complex specifications and
annotations and all types of things. You
drop it in and you know at a high level
the overall outline of the PDF. You
know, these are the main sections inside
of it. So, what you can do is you can
drop that PDF in and you ask the AI to
list out all the headings and describe
the images inside of that PDF. It then
gives you some form of an outline that
you can look at. Now, when you're
spot-checking the outline, you can
either check everything methodically,
depending on how big it is, or you can
spot check it. And when you're
spot-eing, you want to look for areas
where the AI made a mistake or missed
something. In this case, let's assume
that the AI got the executive summary
right, the risk assessment, the revenue
chart, and the projections. But when we
check the cost breakdown, we realize
that either it missed it completely or
it got it incorrect. That's a good
signal for us to know that this AI
either is able to do this and we just
need a better prompt or the AI itself
can't handle this type of PDF. Quick
pause in your regular programming. This
video is brought to you by me as always.
So, two quick things. First off, Blow is
a 30-day AI insight series, completely
free. You'll get 30 insights in your
inbox so I can apply AI to your business
and your work. The second thing is if
you'd like to work with me, blower a
series of offerings to see if there's a
good fit between the two of us, such as
AI coaching or a private AI community
for business leaders and owners. Now,
let's get back to the video. That's our
first step in this process for the
input. The second one is figuring out
when it's a size issue, not a complexity
issue. So, say you've given an AI 300
pages, and this is just an arbitrary
number. It could be 3,000. And in this
document, you really only care about a
subset of it. So, maybe you only care
about 50 pages inside the 300. Well,
there's two things we can do here.
Depending on where that data sits, if
the data that you care about is in the
same section, so say it's between pages
50 and 100, we can just tell the AI,
hey, only focus on these pages and
ignore the rest. Or better yet, you can
just take out that part of the PDF and
give it to the AI. So, you're not
distracting it by all this other
context. Because when you give it the
entire thing and you don't say anything,
it's going to be biased based off of all
the information it's seen here. And
that's going to alter its final output
that it provides you. And that's the
first thing, basically focusing its
attention on the area you care about.
But let's say that what you care about
isn't just in a specific segment of a
document, but it's kind of interspersed
throughout. If it's interspersed
throughout like this, what you're going
to do is you're going to tell the AI,
hey, I only care about this topic, and I
only want to answer these types of
questions in relation to this topic. By
doing that, you're not necessarily
focusing its attention on a page count,
but you're focusing on a subject. And by
doing that, there's a higher probability
that it's going to ignore the stuff
that's irrelevant, only focus on the
things you care about, and give you a
much higher quality response. So, we've
talked about the type and complexity of
files as well as the size. The final
thing I want to leave you with inside
the input layer is two sentences that
you can put at the end of any of your
prompts. And by just pasting this in,
you're going to dramatically reduce the
amount of hallucination the AI provides
back to you. So, the first sentence here
is base your answers only on what's in
the file I gave you. What we're doing
here is a grounding effect. This is
called grounding. So, we're grounding
the AI in the file we provided. By doing
this, we're going to mitigate the AI
pulling from its own knowledge base or
the internet. It's only going to pull
from the file we provided. In this next
sentence, we're giving the AI an out.
So, what we're saying here is if you're
unsure about something or the file
doesn't contain enough information to
answer, say so instead of guessing. By
doing this, we're allowing the AI to
tell us it's uncertain. Because often
times, all AI, they want to be certain
at all times. So, they're always going
to try to guess or fill gaps. But if we
give it the option to tell us it doesn't
know or is not certain, then we can
quickly identify where its weaknesses
might be in the file that it's looking
at. So, this is layer one, the input.
The next layer is context. And the way
that I define context in the four layer
structure is the prompt that you provide
the AI, the associated context files you
share with it, as well as the complexity
of the task. So, an analogy that I like
to talk through that resonates with a
lot of people I work with is let's say
you hire a new employee. They're
extremely smart, have a great resume,
and you give them a sticky note that
says, "Review this and give me your
thoughts." And when you say this, you're
referring to a massive filing cabinet
that probably has 3,000 files in it. So,
they'll come back to you and give you an
answer, but it's probably going to be
extremely general and likely in the
wrong direction. And it sounds silly as
I talk through this, but we often treat
AI like this even though AI is basically
a new employee for the company. So we
need to give it the right context for it
to be successful. So to avoid this
common failure layer, there's a few
things I'm going to walk you through.
And the first thing is the prompt. We
need to be as specific as possible when
we're talking to the AI. And the
framework that I use time and time again
is the WW framework. So it's what, why,
and how. And all we need to do is answer
these three questions in a detailed way,
and the AI is going to have a higher
chance of doing what we want. So the
first question is what do we want the AI
to do? In this specific section of the
prompt, we need to be specific about
what exactly the task is the AI is
trying to achieve. And after the what we
have the why. So this is answering a
simple question is why does it matter
and the purpose of this question is to
provide the AI our intent inside the
prompt. And this is one that a lot of
people skip but is extremely critical
for the AI to succeed. Reason being is
that if you give the AI your intent,
it'll likely do a bunch of other things
that you forgot to ask it and still
achieve the task that you wanted to at
the threshold you wanted to achieve it.
So this is a great way to hedge poor
prompts.
After the why, we then have the how. And
this is all about constraints. So how
should I do this specific task? So is
there a certain format, a tone, length,
etc. that you want the AI to follow when
achieving said task. This is the first
part, the prompt. We want to be as
specific as possible for the prompt.
After this, we have the complexity of
the ask that we're giving to the AI.
Oftentimes, I'll see people give prompts
to AI where in that task itself, there
might be 10, 20, or 30 steps the AI has
to achieve for it to then meet the the
expectations that they have. And don't
get me wrong, some AIs can do this. So,
if you're using cloud co-work, cloud
code or codeex, there might be a chance
they could do it. But often times, if
you don't have that scaffolding set up
in the right way, it's not going to
achieve it successfully. So what we want
to do is if we give the AI a complex
task that has 10 or more steps and it
can't achieve this task because it
failed, the next thing we want to do is
we want to break it into smaller chunks.
So instead of giving it 10 tasks at
once, we start with the first three
tasks. Say, hey, do these three first.
If it achieves those successfully, then
you move to the next three, then the
next three. But while you're doing this,
you may see that, okay, well, even these
three tasks might be too complex for the
AI. If so, we break it down even further
and we do one task at a time. By doing
this, we're breaking down the complexity
for the AI while increasing the chances
of it succeeding. And this is the second
layer of the failure stack where a lot
of people often mess up the context
where they share a bad prompt, they
don't share enough context that's
relevant, and or they give a task that's
too complex. After layer two, we then
have layer three, which is the model.
And this failure mode is where you
basically just choose the wrong model
for the specific task. Because let's say
that you're doing some construction and
you have a screwdriver and you need to
put a nail on a wall. You're not going
to use a screwdriver to put a nail in a
wall. You want to use a hammer. So you
brought the wrong tool for the job. The
same thing applies to AI. Every single
model has a specific strength and we
want to utilize that strength for the
task at hand. Let me give you two
examples. So say that we have model A
and model B. In one use case, we could
be assessing PDFs. So you have really,
really complex PDFs with specifications,
drawings, OCR, images, all types of
stuff. And let's say that you give it to
chatbt or claude and it gives you a
response and you can see that it's
missing a ton of information based off
its response. You take that same exact
input. You then just drop it inside of
Gemini 3.1 Pro with the same prompt and
you can see that it almost gave you a
back a perfect response. Reason being is
that Gemini can see better than other
models. So for that specific task, it's
better. Let me give you another example.
Let's say that you're doing writing and
you give chatbt an input and you want it
to write like you. So you want it to
write in your specific tone, structure,
etc. It gives you a response back and it
sounds completely robotic. You give that
same exact prompt to cla4.6.
It responds to you and it's almost
perfect, maybe even better than your way
of conveying things. That again is
another example that Claude is better at
writing than GPT when it comes to
matching someone's tone. And for this
layer and form of failure, if you're
running a test with an AI and it keeps
failing, take that prompt and input,
paste it into another model and it might
just achieve it because it's the right
tool for the job. And then finally, we
have the fourth layer. And this is where
you potentially hit an actual wall with
AI's ability today. But I need to give a
huge caveat here. There's probably 80 to
90% of the issues that you're having can
all be fixed with the first two layers.
You've either given it a poor input or
you've given it poor context, such as
the prompt, the context files, and also
the task. But let's say that you've
given it really good input and really
good context. And you've tried multiple
models. If you've done all of this and
the output is consistently bad, so
you're getting the same type of bad
every single time you interact with all
the models, there may be a specific
barrier in the model's ability to
achieve said task. So when that happens,
you don't give up. You do two things.
The first thing that you do is you try
to break that task down just a little
bit more. So this is similar to what we
talked about previously with breaking
the task down, but we're taking a
different angle on it. So we're going to
break the task down. And once we've
broken it down just a bit further, we're
going to categorize these subtasks
inside the task. And we're going to say,
okay, can AI handle this? Can it handle
this? Can it handle this? AI will likely
be able to handle some subtasks in that
overall task. If it can, you can
outsource those to the AI, but there may
be some that the AI struggles with and
can't do, and those are the ones that
once you've identified, you want to add
to your wish list. So this is the second
thing we're going to do. So the first
thing, break it down into tasks and
categorize what AI can do and can't do.
After this, we're going to create our AI
wish list. in your AI wish list are
basically a series of tasks that the AI
can't achieve today. And it's important
to revisit this wish list on a
reoccurring basis. So anytime that a new
model, a new feature, a new tool is
released, you want to retest these tasks
with those new models and features. And
since there's new things coming out
every single month, there's a high
probability that the thing on your wish
list that was placed there 6 months ago
is achievable by AI today. And that's
our fourth failure, the final wall. So
as a quick recap, we have the four
layers, the four things that would
commonly fail with AI and the different
things you can do to mitigate or get
around those. So the first one is your
input file. So how complex is it? How
big is it? And what type of file is it?
Based on that, we want to focus the AI's
attention on what matters for that file.
The next layer is context. And remember,
the way I define this is going to be the
prompt. So specifically what you're
saying to the AI, the context file
shared, so making sure you say the right
context, the right time, and the
complexity of the task. If it's too
complex, break it down. And for the
prompt, you can always use the what,
why, and how framework for your base
prompt. After you've done these two,
which again are going to solve 90% of
your problems, you'll then move on to
the third layer of failure. So if those
two have still failed and you did a good
job there, you then want to switch your
model out because remember, you want to
use the right tool for the right job. So
go ahead and swap the model out and see
how it performs. And finally, if we've
tested everything and we're still
failing, that's when we come to the
fourth layer, which is the actual wall.
And again, we don't just give up
immediately. We do two things. We first
break apart the task to smaller tasks.
We then label those tasks what AI can
and can't do. The things that AI can't
do, we then add to our wish list. And we
then revisit those tasks on a monthly
basis when new models and new features
rolled out to see if those tasks can be
achieved by AI today. And that's it. So,
as a reminder, two quick things. First
off, Blow is a 30-day AI insight series,
completely free. You'll get 30 insights
in your inbox how you can apply AI to
your business and your work. The second
thing is if you'd like to work with me,
lower a series of offerings to see if
there's a good fit from the two of us.
But now let's ask the question, what
happens when you run the stack, you fix
the problem and AI hands you something
that looks great. Do you check every
word? Do you skim it? Do you just trust
AI? Most people get that wrong. I'll
show you one question that tells you
exactly how much attention any AI output
actually deserves. It's in this video
right here. So go ahead and click it.
Click that video, internet. I'll see you
next time.